Add "Do you know the best libraries to fetch data in React?" (#6316)
SSWConsulting/SSW.Rules.Content: rules/fetch-data-react/rule.md

---
type: rule
archivedreason: 
title: Do you know the best libraries to fetch data in React?
guid: cae7be1d-2313-43e1-8cc5-cfc1e77b4bb4
uri: fetch-data-nextjs
created: 2023-08-08T05:24:35Z
authors:
- title: Harry Ross
  url: https://www.ssw.com.au/people/harry-ross
related:
- fetch-data-nextjs
---

> While using a regular `useEffect` to run when a component is loaded to load data from an API is super easy, it may result in unnecesary duplicate requests for data. It is best to use a library for this purpose, as not only does it solve the afforementioned issue, but also comes with a variety of other useful features such as caching, background updates, and pre-fetching. 

Reviewer: Also to mention that you have to take care and teardown the setup after the component is unloaded, because then `setData` and `setLoading` is no longer available - typically you'll see this error:

> Can't perform a React state update on an unmounted component. This is a no-op, but it indicates a memory leak in your application. To fix, cancel all subscriptions and asynchronous tasks in a useEffect cleanup function.

Author: Made some changes - shortened some bits in this section and added errors as a reason why you would choose to use these libraries

<!--endintro-->

Below is an example of a standard data fetch in React:

::: bad
```tsx

const Component = () => {
  const [data, setData] = useState({});
  const [loading, setLoading] = useState(true);

  useEffect(() => {
    fetch("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1")
      .then(res => res.json())
      .then(json => {
        setData(json);
        setLoading(false);
      })
  }, [])

  return (
    {loading
      ? <> {/* Display data here */} </>
      : <p>Loading...</p>
    }
  )
}

```
:::

This example is not ideal, as it means every time we reload this page component, or if we make the same request on another page, there will be an unneeded request made instead of pulling the data from a cache. 

> There are two primary options that both serve effectively the same purpose in providing developers with useful hooks for fetching data. These libraries not only give developers a wide range of other features, but also reduces the amount of boilerplate code they have to write. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below are the two recommended options that both serve effectively the same purpose in providing developers with useful hooks for fetching data. These libraries not only give developers a wide range of other features, but also reduces the amount of boilerplate code they have to write. 
```

I'd suggest to use "recommended" instead of "primary" so this is more subjective (i.e. SSW's recommendation) compared to saying that "there are only minor smaller fetching libraries out there" 😄

```tsx
const fetcher = (url) => fetch(url).then(res => res.json())

export const Page = () => {
  const { data, error, isLoading } = useSWR("/api/todos", fetcher);

  if (error) return <div>Error loading data</div>
  if (loading) return <div>Loading...</div>

  return <div>{/* Display todos here */}</div>
}
```

Some features of SWR: 

* Small bundle size - [only 4.4 kB](https://bundlephobia.com/package/swr@2.2.0)
* Data caching
* Automatically flattens duplicate requests 
* Automatic revalidation of data (either when the page is focused or when a page reconnects to the internet)
* Pagination with [`useSWRInfinite`](https://swr.vercel.app/docs/pagination)
* Built-in support for [React 18's Suspense](https://react.dev/reference/react/Suspense) with the [`{ suspense: true }` option](https://swr.vercel.app/docs/suspense)
* Integration with [Next.js's SSR/SSG capabilities](https://swr.vercel.app/docs/with-nextjs)
* Real-time data support (i.e. WebSockets, SSE) with [`useSWRSubscription`](https://swr.vercel.app/docs/subscription)

**Note:** Currently, the vast majority of SWR APIs are [not compatible with the App router in Next.js 13.](https://swr.vercel.app/docs/with-nextjs)

> You can find out more about using SWR at [swr.vercel.app](https://swr.vercel.app/).

Reviewer 2: Awesome work, I've added a suggestion (below) to add RTK Query!!

```suggestion
You can find out more about using SWR at [swr.vercel.app](https://swr.vercel.app/).

## RTK Query

RTK Query, part of the Redux Toolkit, is a compelling alternative to SWR and React Query. It integrates seamlessly with Redux, offers tools to generate typed APIs from openAPI schemas, and provides a slew of features to streamline data handling.

Here's an basic example of how you can use RTK Query:

```tsx
import { createApi, fetchBaseQuery } from '@reduxjs/toolkit/query/react';

const todosApi = createApi({
  baseQuery: fetchBaseQuery({ baseUrl: '/api' }),
  endpoints: (builder) => ({
    getTodos: builder.query<Array<Todo>, void>({
      query: () => 'todos',
    }),
  }),
});

export const { useGetTodosQuery } = todosApi;
export const todosApiReducer = todosApi.reducer;
```
**Figure: Create the API slice - this generates a React hook called `useGetTodosQuery`**

```tsx
import { useGetTodosQuery } from './todosApi';

const TodoPage = () => {
  const { data: todos, isError, isLoading } = useGetTodosQuery();

  if (isLoading) return <p>Loading...</p>;
  if (isError) return <p>Error fetching todos</p>;

  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Todos</h1>
      <ul>
        {todos.map(todo => <li key={todo.id}>{todo.title}</li>)}
      </ul>
    </div>
  );
};

export default TodoPage;
```
**Figure: Then it can be used like this!**

Some features of RTK Query: 

- **Seamless Redux Integration:** Designed as part of the Redux Toolkit, RTK Query is intrinsically designed to work with Redux, providing a cohesive data management experience. [Learn more](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/introduction/getting-started#rtk-query)
- **OpenAPI Schemas Code Generation:** Auto-generates end-to-end typed APIs based on openAPI schemas, drastically reducing boilerplate and ensuring type safety. [Learn more](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/usage/code-generation#openapi)
- **Caching Mechanism:** Efficient cache management based on endpoint and serialized arguments, eliminating unnecessary fetches. [Learn more](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/usage/cache-behavior)
- **Automatic Retrying:** Built-in mechanism to automatically retry failed queries, enhancing resilience. [Learn more](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/usage/polling)
- **Prefetching:** Proactively fetches data in anticipation of user actions to enhance UX. [Learn more](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/usage/prefetching)
- **Parallel and Dependent Queries:** Efficient handling of multiple simultaneous or dependent data fetching. [Learn more](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/usage/customizing-queries#performing-multiple-requests-with-a-single-query)
- **Invalidation and Refetching:** Smart strategies for data updates and cache invalidation. [Learn more](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/usage/cache-behavior#re-fetching-after-mutations-by-invalidating-cache-tags)
- **Auto Garbage Collection:** Smartly removes unused data from cache, optimizing performance.
- **Versatile Protocols Support:** Can integrate with various backend systems due to its adaptability for multiple protocols, including REST. [Learn more](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/usage/customizing-queries)
- **Platform Flexibility:** Provides hooks tailored for React and extends its capabilities wherever Redux works. [Learn more](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/introduction/quick-start)

Discover more about RTK Query on [Redux Toolkit's official documentation](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/).

Reviewer 2: Annndddd GitHub does not like ``` 😅😅 So I guess don't auto commit that lmao...
